doc/examples/using_cachedjit.rst, before:

Cached Just-In-Time compilation
===============================

With FluidPythran, one can use the Ahead-Of-Time compiler Pythran in a
Just-In-Time mode. It is really the **easiest way to speedup a function with
Pythran**, just by adding a decorator! And it works also in notebooks!

It is a "work in progress" so (i) it can be buggy and (ii) the API is not
great, but it is a good start!

.. literalinclude:: using_cachedjit.py

In the long terms, we won't need the :code:`#pythran import ...` and
:code:`@used_by_cachedjit`...

Note that it can be very convenient to use type hints **and**
:code:`@cachedjit` in order to avoid multiple warmup periods:

.. literalinclude:: using_cachedjit_diff_types.py


Comparison Numba vs FluidPythran
--------------------------------

Code taken from this `blog post
<https://flothesof.github.io/optimizing-python-code-numpy-cython-pythran-numba.html>`_
by Florian LE BOURDAIS.

.. literalinclude:: perf_numba.py

The warmup is much longer for FluidPythran but remember that it is a cached JIT
so it is an issue only for the first call of the function. When we reimport the
module, there is no warmup.

Then we see that **Pythran is very good to optimize high-level NumPy code!** In
contrast, (with my setup and on my computer) Numba has not been able to
optimize this function.

However, Numba is good to speedup the code with loops, but even with this code,
it is still slightly slower than Pythran with the high-level NumPy code.

Commit message:

Start to work on PYTHRANIZE_AT_IMPORT (for cachejit)

doc/examples/using_cachedjit.rst, after:

Cached Just-In-Time compilation
===============================

With FluidPythran, one can use the Ahead-Of-Time compiler Pythran in a
Just-In-Time mode. It is really the **easiest way to speedup a function with
Pythran**, just by adding a decorator! And it works also in notebooks!

It is a "work in progress" so (i) it can be buggy and (ii) the API is not
great, but it is a good start!

.. literalinclude:: using_cachedjit.py

In the long terms, we won't need the :code:`#pythran import ...` and
:code:`@used_by_cachedjit`...

Note that it can be very convenient to use type hints **and**
:code:`@cachedjit` in order to avoid multiple warmup periods:

.. literalinclude:: using_cachedjit_diff_types.py

If the environment variable :code:`PYTHRANIZE_AT_IMPORT` is set, fluidpythran
compiles at import time the functions with type hints.

Comparison Numba vs FluidPythran
--------------------------------

Code taken from this `blog post
<https://flothesof.github.io/optimizing-python-code-numpy-cython-pythran-numba.html>`_
by Florian LE BOURDAIS.

.. literalinclude:: perf_numba.py

The warmup is much longer for FluidPythran but remember that it is a cached JIT
so it is an issue only for the first call of the function. When we reimport the
module, there is no warmup.

Then we see that **Pythran is very good to optimize high-level NumPy code!** In
contrast, (with my setup and on my computer) Numba has not been able to
optimize this function.

However, Numba is good to speedup the code with loops, but even with this code,
it is still slightly slower than Pythran with the high-level NumPy code.
